% COMPLYCTL(1) Complyctl Manual
% Marcus Burghardt <maburgha@redhat.com>
% April 2025

# NAME

complyctl - Complyctl CLI perform compliance assessment activities using providers for different underlying technologies.

# SYNOPSIS

**complyctl** [command] [flags]

# DESCRIPTION

Complyctl CLI leverages OSCAL to perform compliance assessment activities, using providers for each stage of the lifecycle.

Complyctl can be extended to support desired policy engines (PVPs) by the use of providers.
The provider acts as the integration between complyctl and the PVPs native interface.
Each provider is responsible for converting the policy content described in OSCAL into the input format expected by the PVP.
In addition, the provider converts the raw results provided by the PVP into the schema used by complyctl to generate OSCAL output.

Providers communicate with complyctl via gRPC and can be authored using any preferred language. The provider acts as the gRPC server while the complyctl CLI acts as the client. When a complyctl command is run, it invokes the appropriate method served by the provider.

See more about authoring providers at https://github.com/complytime/complytime-providers/blob/main/docs/provider-guide.md.

Review the `openscap-provider that is shipped with complytime-providers at https://github.com/complytime/complytime/complytime-providers/tree/main/cmd/openscap-provider/README.md.

Also check the "SEE ALSO" section for provider specific man pages.

Complyctl is built on https://github.com/oscal-compass/compliance-to-policy-go which provides a flexible provider framework for leveraging OSCAL with various PVPs.

# COMMANDS

**completion**
Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell.

**generate**
Generate PVP policy from an assessment plan.

**help**
Display help about any command.

**list**
List information about supported frameworks and components.

**info**
Display information about a framework's controls and rules.

**plan**
Generate a new assessment plan for a given compliance framework ID.

**scan**
Scan environment with assessment plan.

**version**
Print the version.

# OPTIONS

**-d**, **--debug**
Output debug logs.

**-h**, **--help**
Show help for complyctl.

Run **complyctl [command] --help** for more information about a specific command.

# EXAMPLES

## Leveraging the info command

Use the `info` command functionality to explore information about controls, rules, and parameters within a framework.

```bash
$ complyctl info anssi_bp28_minimal
# List the controls in the framework

$ complyctl info anssi_bp28_minimal --control <control-id>
# List details about a control and rules used by that control

$ complyctl info anssi_bp28_minimal --rule <rule-id>
# List the parameters used be a specific rule

$ complyctl info anssi_bp28_minimal --parameter <parameter-id>
# See the current set value and valid alternatives for a parameter
```

## Assessment Scoping using the plan command

The `plan` command is used for scoping an OSCAL Assessment Plan. Default scope can be changed via a configuration file generated by the `--dry-run` option. The fields of the `config.yml` can be updated to scope controls, rules, and parameters.

```bash
$ complyctl plan anssi_bp28_minimal --dry-run --out config.yml 
# Populate framework-id defaults in config.yml

$ complyctl plan anssi_bp28_minimal --scope-config config.yml  
# Configure plan based on updates made in config.yml
```

## Configuring the Assessment Plan

### Excluding Controls and Rules

Excluding components of the assessment plan works the same way for both controls and rules. To exclude a control from the assessment plan, delete the entire group of YAML keys associated with that `controlId`. Activities associated with that `controlId` will be marked as "skipped" if there are no other controls in scope of the activity.

All rules associated with a controlId are included by default and indicated by the "*" global wildcard. To exclude a rule specific to a controlId, use the `excludeRules` YAML key. To exclude a rule across all controls, use the `globalExcludeRules` YAML key. The `globalExcludeRules` YAML key takes priority over `includeRules` globally.

### Selecting Parameter Values

Parameters of the assessment-plan are grouped by remarks value. To configure the `selectParameters` field, update the second-level YAML key `value` with a valid alternative for the selected parameter. Selecting parameter values in the `selectParameters` field will allow you to update the initial set value for a parameter. If the update to the parameter value is not a valid parameter alternative, the `assessment-plan.json` will not be written and an error will be produced, listing the valid alternatives.

Below is an example `config.yml`. The example excludes the controlId `r30` and uses the `excludeRules` YAML key to exclude `accounts_password_set_max_life_root`. The `globalExcludeRules` YAML key is used to exclude all rules for all controlIds in the `config.yml`. The controlId `r31` has a valid parameter update to `var_password_pam_ucredit` from "1" to "365."

```yaml
frameworkId: anssi_bp28_minimal
includeControls:
#- controlId: r30 # Delete all fields associated with r30
#  controlTitle: Removal Of Unused User Accounts
#  includeRules:
#  - "*"
#  selectParameters:
#  - name: N/A
#    value: N/A
- controlId: r31
  controlTitle: User Password Strength
  includeRules:
  - "*"
  excludeRules: # Use to exclude a rule specific to the controlId
  - "accounts_password_set_max_life_root"
  waiveRules: # Use to waive a rule specific to the controlId
  - "accounts_password_pam_minlen"
  selectParameters:
  - name: var_password_pam_ucredit # Initial value = "1"
    value: "365" # Update parameter value to a valid alternative ("365")
  - name: var_password_pam_unix_rounds
    value: "11" # Initial value = "11"
globalExcludeRules:
- "*" # This will exclude all rules for all controlIds
globalWaiveRules:
- "*" # This will waive all rules for all controlIds
```

## Assessment Plan Scope Inheritance

When excluding a `controlId` from the `config.yml`, all rules associated with the `controlId` will be skipped and not assessed in the assessment plan. If a rule is associated with multiple controls, they should be explicitly excluded for all related controls or via `globalExcludeRules`. Otherwise the rule will still be executed by the scanner if any control includes it.

The activities of the assessment plan will be indicated as "skipped" for rules that are globally excluded. Therefore, all parameters associated with a globally excluded rule will not be used in the generated `assessment-plan.json`.

When waiving a rule, the values of `includeRules` will first be checked to ensure the rule was not skipped. If the rule is not skipped, it will be marked as "waived" in the Assessment Plan. Waived rules are expected to fail due to any known exception related to the environment being scanned. Waiving rules with `waiveRules` has the same functionality of `globalWaiveRules`. All rules marked as "waived" will be propogated across `controlIds`.

The output in `assessment-results.md` will reflect the `Waived Rules` within the `Failed Rules` section. In the case of a rule passing, it will be included in the `Passed Rules` section. 

The activities of the assessment plan will be indicated as "waived" for rules that are globally waived. Therefore, all parameters associated with a globally waived rule will not be altered in the generated `assessment-plan.json`.

After configuring the `assessment-plan.json` the activities of the assessment plan and their selected parameter values will be updated.

## Generating Policy Artifacts from the Assessment Plan

The complyctl `generate` command will generate the **provider-specific** policy from the OSCAL Assessment Plan, more specifically it processes the validation component from the assessment-plan.json.

## Scanning System Environment with the Assessment Plan and Policy Artifacts

The `scan` command will scan the environment with the OSCAL Assessment Plan using the generated policy. Observations will be returned to complyctl to be carried out and produced as an assessment-results.json. 

### Assessment Results

Assessment Results will be generated in the `assessment-results.json` file and can be viewed as Markdown by passing the `--with-md` flag. 

# SEE ALSO

complyctl-openscap-provider(7)

See the Upstream project at https://github.com/complytime/complyctl for more detailed documentation.

See https://github.com/oscal-compass/compliance-to-policy-go project.

# COPYRIGHT

© 2025 Red Hat, Inc. Complyctl is released under the terms of the Apache-2.0 license.
